AI #1944: Refactor Attribute normative requirements to align with guidelines (#1981)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/attributes/data_generator_calculated_split_cost_allocation_handling.md

# Data Generator-Calculated Split Cost Allocation Handling

The data generator-calculated split cost allocation for data generator-defined services is a capability that can be offered by data generators which allocates (or in some cases provides more granular detail about) a charge to a more granular level. This is accomplished by taking a charge record present in a FOCUS dataset ([*origin charge*](#glossary:origin-charge)) and splitting it into multiple charge records ([*allocated charges*](#glossary:allocated-charge)) to reflect the more granular detail, while ensuring the origin charge can be derived from the combination of *allocated charges*. This feature is used by practitioners to conduct chargebacks and better understand the usage of resources.

## Requirements

> When the data generator supports data generator-calculated split cost allocation, column conforming to DataGeneratorCalculatedSplitCostAllocationHandling attribute MUST adhere to the following requirements:

Reviewer: Why the preamble here?  It only gets applied via conditionality elsewhere... yes?  We don't carry this conditionality in any of the other attributes.

```suggestion
Column conforming to DataGeneratorCalculatedSplitCostAllocationHandling attribute MUST adhere to the following requirements:
```

Author: This is the only attribute that has a related applicability criteria condition. I experimented with a few versions – at times it felt relevant to highlight it in the attribute itself, other times not. 

Since you also feel it’s unnecessary, that’s a sufficient signal for me. 😄 
Accepting the suggestion.

*Note: The applicability criteria is specified in the requirement where we declare conformance.*

* [*FOCUS dataset column*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset-column) values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the *FOCUS dataset column* represents a dimension.
* *FOCUS dataset column* values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the *FOCUS dataset column* represents a non-summable [*metric*](#glossary:metric) (e.g., unit prices).

> * The sum of *FOCUS dataset column* values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the *FOCUS dataset column* represents a summable *metric* (e.g., costs and quantities).

Reviewer: ### Invalid Normative Subjects

Based on the updated `normative-requirements-guidelines.md` (Section: Normative Subject), the grammatical subject of the requirement MUST be a defined schema-level entity (e.g., `*FOCUS dataset column*`). The guidelines explicitly forbid using things like "values" as the primary subject. 

In these requirements, the grammatical subjects are technically "*FOCUS dataset column* values" and "The sum of *FOCUS dataset column* values". We should rephrase these so the column itself is the strict subject.

**Suggested Fix:**
```suggestion
* [*FOCUS dataset column*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset-column) representing a dimension MUST match the corresponding value of the *origin charge* when present in an *allocated charge*.
* *FOCUS dataset column* representing a non-summable [*metric*](#glossary:metric) (e.g., unit prices) MUST match the corresponding value of the *origin charge* when present in an *allocated charge*.
* *FOCUS dataset column* representing a summable *metric* (e.g., costs and quantities) MUST equal the corresponding value of the *origin charge* when its values in all *allocated charges* are summed.
```

Author: I suggest we use "value in the ..." rather than "value of the ..." when referring to values inside particular charges, as “in” feels more precise for indicating their location.

Regarding the sum of FOCUS dataset column, the "The sum of ..." construction is already used elsewhere in the specification (e.g., EffectiveCost and BilledCost). Attaching a snippet for reference:

> * The sum of EffectiveCost across all related covering and covered charges MUST equal...

*Note: We should also decide whether to use match or equal, and if both are allowed, clarify when to use each. (see AI #1998*

```suggestion
* [*FOCUS dataset column*](#glossary:FOCUS-dataset-column) representing a dimension MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when present in an *allocated charge*.
* *FOCUS dataset column* representing a non-summable [*metric*](#glossary:metric) (e.g., unit prices) MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when present in an *allocated charge*.
* The sum of *FOCUS dataset column* across *allocated charges* MUST match the *FOCUS dataset column* in the corresponding *origin charge* when the *FOCUS dataset column* represents a summable metric (e.g., costs and quantities).
```

Reviewer: The first two bullets are good. They align with the `<Subject> + <Keyword> + <State>` formula by making the column itself the grammatical subject.

However, the third bullet still technically violates the **Normative Subject** rule. Because it starts with "The sum of...", the grammatical subject of the sentence is the mathematical concept of "The sum", rather than the schema-level entity (`*FOCUS dataset column*`). 

I completely understand that this matches existing precedent elsewhere in the spec. However, we have to review this strictly against the new guidelines we're establishing in #1967. Our primary goal here is to enforce strict, machine-verifiable consistency in our attributes going forward, which means we either have to break away from those older precedents, or explicitly allow those exceptions.

So, if you feel strongly that this specific phrasing is necessary, you should add an exception for it in #1967 so the parser knows how to handle it. Otherwise, we need to stick to the strict `<Subject> + <Keyword> + <State>` formula to proceed here.

To make it pass the strict parsing rules, we have to flip the sentence structure so the column itself is the subject. 

Here are two options that satisfy the strict parser while maintaining your intent:

**Option 1 (Cleanest):**
```markdown
* *FOCUS dataset column* representing a summable metric (e.g., costs and quantities) MUST equal the corresponding value of the *origin charge* when summed across all *allocated charges*.
```

**Option 2 (Alternative phrasing):**
```markdown
* *FOCUS dataset column* representing a summable metric (e.g., costs and quantities) MUST have a sum across all corresponding *allocated charges* that matches the value in the *origin charge*.
```

Author: I'd like to keep this phrasing as we use it in individual columns as well, so I've added an exception to the Allowed Subjects section:

> **Exception for Aggregate Expressions:** When a requirement describes an aggregate or derived value (e.g., sums, products, counts), the aggregate expression (e.g., "The sum of", "The product of") MAY be used as the grammatical subject when it improves readability. The column or metric being constrained MUST still be clearly identifiable within the requirement.

@shawnalpay could you please also review?
p.s. Appreciate the strict parsing perspective!

Reviewer: The exception works for me!  If you add that, we can accept the suggestion you made earlier in this thread.

Author: I've added it to the guidelines. So, I'll go ahead and commit the latest suggestion.

# Data Generator-Calculated Split Cost Allocation Handling

> The data generator-calculated split cost allocation for data generator-defined services is a capability that can be offered by data generators which allocates (or in some cases provides more granular detail about) a charge to a more granular level. This is accomplished by taking a charge record present in a FOCUS dataset ([*origin charge*](#glossary:origin-charge)) and splitting it into multiple charge records ([*allocated charges](#glossary:allocated-charge)) to reflect the more granular detail, while ensuring the origin charge can be derived from the combination of *allocated charges*. This feature is used by practitioners to conduct chargebacks and better understand the usage of resources.

Reviewer 2: Missing closing `*` before `]` in the glossary link for "allocated charges" -- breaks italic + link rendering.

```suggestion
The data generator-calculated split cost allocation for data generator-defined services is a capability that can be offered by data generators which allocates (or in some cases provides more granular detail about) a charge to a more granular level. This is accomplished by taking a charge record present in a FOCUS dataset ([*origin charge*](#glossary:origin-charge)) and splitting it into multiple charge records ([*allocated charges*](#glossary:allocated-charge)) to reflect the more granular detail, while ensuring the origin charge can be derived from the combination of *allocated charges*. This feature is used by practitioners to conduct chargebacks and better understand the usage of resources.
```

Should be `[*allocated charges*](#glossary:allocated-charge)` not `[*allocated charges](#glossary:allocated-charge)`.

> The data generator-calculated split cost allocation for data generator-defined services is a capability that can be offered by data generators which allocates (or in some cases provides more granular detail about) a charge to a more granular level. This is accomplished by taking a charge record present in a FOCUS dataset ([*origin charge*](#glossary:origin-charge)) and splitting it into multiple charge records ([*allocated charges*](#glossary:allocated-charge)) to reflect the more granular detail, while ensuring the origin charge can be derived from the combination of *allocated charges*. This feature is used by practitioners to conduct chargebacks and better understand the usage of resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The data generator-calculated split cost allocation for data generator-defined services is a capability that can be offered by data generators which allocates a charge to a more granular details. This is accomplished by taking a charge record present in a FOCUS dataset ([*origin charge*](#glossary:origin-charge)) and splitting it into multiple charge records ([*allocated charges*](#glossary:allocated-charge)) to reflect the more granular detail, while ensuring the origin charge can be derived from the combination of *allocated charges*. This feature is used by practitioners to conduct chargebacks and better understand the usage of resources.
```

Duplicate use of provide granular detail in one sentence, this removes that duplication.

Reviewer: Wherever possible in this PR, I'd like to keep the surface area as small as possible.  I'd like to keep it as streamlined as possible in order to maximize its chances of being approved.

To that end: if you're open to it, @thecloudman, please record a comment advocating for touching the verbiage here on AI #1878, then we can resolve this thread.

Reviewer 3: Done, Ai added - resolving this comment @shawnalpay

## Requirements

When the data generator supports data generator-calculated split cost allocation, column conforming to DataGeneratorCalculatedSplitCostAllocationHandling attribute MUST adhere to the following requirements:

> * The sum of FOCUS column values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the FOCUS column represents a summable [*metric*](#glossary:metric) (e.g., costs and quantities).

Reviewer 4: Before, this was not specific to FOCUS columns and now it is. Does this change imply that aggregable values in custom columns do not need to sum up to the same number? I.e. do we need to duplicate these requirements for custom columns like you've done for Currency Format?

Author: resolving in favor of [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1981/files#r3009103892)

* FOCUS column values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the FOCUS column represents a non-summable *metric* (e.g., unit prices).
* FOCUS column values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the FOCUS column represents a dimension.

> * FOCUS column values in *allocated charges* MUST include the same keys and values present in the [CostAndUsage.Tags](#datasets.costandusage.tags) in the *origin charge* when the FOCUS column contains tag values.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

I believe we agreed you could strike this as it is duplicative with the prior line. I believe this was included initially to be explicitly clear about the expectation, but Tags is considered a Dimensional column under our current definitions.

* [*FOCUS column*](#glossary:FOCUS-column) MUST adhere to the following requirements:
  * *FOCUS column* values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the *FOCUS column* represents a non-summable [*metric*](#glossary:metric) (e.g., unit prices).
  * *FOCUS column* values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the *FOCUS column* represents a dimension.
  * The sum of *FOCUS column* values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the *FOCUS column* represents a summable *metric* (e.g., costs and quantities).
* [*Custom column*](#glossary:custom-column) MUST adhere to the following requirements:
  * *Custom column* values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the *custom column* represents a non-summable *metric* (e.g., unit prices).
  * *Custom column* values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the *custom column* represents a dimension.

>   * The sum of *custom column* values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge* when the *custom column* represents a summable *metric* (e.g., costs and quantities).

Author: The original requirements didn't explicitly mention custom columns (unlike other attributes such as CurrencyFormat or NullHandling), so I initially didn't include a separate set of requirements for custom columns. Based on feedback (see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1981/files/6bb42a0d81439edd4a4c3c283c02cf0bc7cce587#r2992374433)), I've now added explicit custom column requirements.

**Question:** The current draft uses MUST. @kk09v, should these be changed to SHOULD to stay consistent with the pattern used in other attributes or should we keep the MUST for custom columns as well?

Reviewer: @ijurica Is this still an open thread, or can it now be resolved per your latest changes?

Author: The latest changes, as well as the previous version, reflect how I believe this attribute should be. I’d appreciate Karl’s confirmation on this. If we don’t get a chance to review together, I can go ahead and close it.

Reviewer: Thanks.  Please take one path or the other before the Members meeting tomorrow.

Reviewer 2: During TF-2 on 2026-04-01, we agreed that we would make the custom column conformance from a MUST to a SHOULD for this attribute.

Author: addressed. resolving.

## Requirements

DataGeneratorCalculatedSplitCostAllocationHandling MUST adhere to the following requirements:

* CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset MUST include [AllocatedMethodId](#datasets.costandusage.allocatedmethodid), [AllocatedResourceId](#datasets.costandusage.allocatedresourceid), [AllocatedResourceName](#datasets.costandusage.allocatedresourcename), and [AllocatedResourceTags](#datasets.costandusage.allocatedtags) when the data generator supports data generator-calculated split cost allocation.

> * CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset SHOULD include [AllocatedMethodDetails](#datasets.costandusage.allocatedmethoddetails) when the data generator supports data generator-calculated split cost allocation.

Author: Removing these two requirements as they are already covered by the presence-related requirements defined in the CostAndUsage dataset.

```suggestion
```

Author: The change has been implemented and recorded in the [Explicitly Flagged Changes list](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1981#issuecomment-4055651553). It can be revisited if needed. Resolving this thread.

* When the data generator supports data generator-calculated split cost allocation, CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset MUST adhere to the following requirements:
  * CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset MUST have its split cost allocation method documented and accessible to practitioners.
  * CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset SHOULD offer split cost allocation on an opt-in basis.
  * CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset MAY contain records for concepts not related to resource usage, if it aligns with the documented split cost allocation method.
  * CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset MAY contain records for unused or unallocated usage from the *origin charge* as separate *allocated charges*, if it aligns with the documented split cost allocation method.
  * CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset MAY contain *allocated charges* with apportioned costs for unused or unallocated usage, if it aligns with the documented split cost allocation method.

>   * CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset MUST conform to normative requirements for all columns in *allocated charges*.

Author: Removing these requirements as they are already added to the CostAndUsage dataset-level (part of this PR).

Additionally, I consider the requirement `CostAndUsage FOCUS dataset MUST conform to normative requirements for all columns in allocated charges` redundant, as it is already implied by the dataset-level conformance requirements, and propose we remove it entirely.

```suggestion
```

Author: The change has been implemented and recorded in the [Explicitly Flagged Changes list](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1981#issuecomment-4055651553). It can be revisited if needed. Resolving this thread.

* When the data generator supports data generator-calculated split cost allocation, FOCUS column MUST adhere to the following requirements:
  * FOCUS column containing summable [*metric*](#glossary:metric) values (e.g., costs and quantities) in *allocated charges* MUST sum up to the corresponding value in the *origin charge*.
  * FOCUS column containing non-summable *metric* values (e.g., unit prices) in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge*.
  * FOCUS column containing dimension values in *allocated charges* MUST match the corresponding value in the *origin charge*.

>   * FOCUS column containing tag values in *allocated charges* MUST include the same keys and values present in the [CostAndUsage.Tags](#datasets.costandusage.tags) column in the *origin charge*.

Author: As far as I recall, the agreement was that Tags in allocated charges must be identical to Tags in the origin charge, which is covered by:

> * FOCUS column containing dimension values in allocated charges MUST match the corresponding value in the origin charge.

However, I'm not sure about the intent of this requirement. Attaching the original version:

> * Allocated charge records MUST include the same keys and values present in the [Tags](#datasets.costandusage.tags) column for the origin charge.

**Two options:**

1. If the intent is only to cover Tags, I believe this is already covered by the dimension values requirement above, and I propose we remove it.

2. If the intent is that both AllocatedResourceTags and Tags must reflect what was in Tags in the origin charge, I suggest we rephrase and relocate it to AllocatedResourceTags.

@kk09v, thoughts?

```suggestion
```

Reviewer 4: I agree that this was phased poorly before. The idea was that a provider could introduce Provider-Defined Split-Cost Allocation without impacting their customers' existing workflows. Basically, the split records would match the origin record, except for the columns that are specific to split cost allocation. There are now more records introduced, but if I sum up the cost, usage, etc. by resource, sku, tags, etc. my results will not change before vs after introduction of split cost allocation.

Reviewer: Confirmed in Mar 25 TF-2 we can resolve.
